---
layout: post
title:  "CPP Development"
date:   2024-02-06 16:44 -0500
categories: cpp
---

Alas! I have finally found a direction that I want to lead my career towards: Robotics. Robotics development can be daunting but with the trained eye, robotics can be a passion anyone can pursue. At the heart of robotics development is ROS, Robot Operating System, and the languages that they use, C++ and Python. I am not too familiar with C++ and **I want to develop the skillset for this language.** After following the tutorial of C++ online- [C++ tutorial](https://cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/), I decided to try coding some myself. I am using VSCode and the extensions that they provide are nifty- they help me with types and other errors that I would otherwise be clueless in.

My first goal is to write insert sort in cpp. Haven't got to that yet but I'm working my way up. I wanted to play with other fundamental data types common in cpp. **The fundamental data types in c++ are characters, integers, floats, boolean, void, null pointer.** You can rearrange them as cifbvn. 

The first is int- has a space of 1 byte or 8 bits. I wanted to use cpp features for this- so I added pointers. Pointers are a bit magical- they point to the address of a block. You can declare them as such before.

``
type * identifier;
``

Pointers are a useful tool and tied to many features in cpp. The first one is pass by reference. By default, pass by value is the method that makes local copies of the parameters for a method. This can work most of the time but doesn't really work for complex data types where the copy is slow. It also doesn't allow you to reference external variables to the method. To pass by reference, you can use the format below:

``
type& identifier
``

The & is an address of operator in cpp. As the name suggests, address of passes the address of the variable to the method you are using. The neat feature of this is that you can access the actually value at the address with the following format:

``
*identifier
``

This allows you to access the value at the address. This way external variables can pass their address to a function and modify the content within. Sometimes programmers don't want this to change. To ensure immutability, add the const keyword in the identifier to make sure that you cannot change the value at the address. Here is some code with int:


```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>


void print_arr(const int*& a) {
    // *a = 3;
    std::cout << "*a: " << *a << std::endl;
    std::cout << "a: " << a << std::endl;
    // for (int i = 0; i < arr.size(); ++i) {
    //     std::cout << arr[i];
    // }
}

int main() {
    // int[] arr = {1,2,3,4,5}
    int b = 1;
    const int * a = &b;
    b = 5;
    print_arr(a);
    std::cout << "b: " << b << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

The first two lines are preprocessor directives which tell the compiler to add the contents from these two headers to the final compilation. This makes the file quite lengthy but is an important part of cpp. iostream involves cout and cin operations and string involves string operations. The details to which and the member function are in documentation online. Every cpp compiler looks for the main program to start the program. In this instance, you can see I create an int b with value 1 and a int pointer that points to the address of b with value 1. Although pointers just contain the address of the value they point to, you must include the value type as the pointer type. I declare the pointer as const which means that I cannot change the value through the pointer. However, this doesn't mean that the value is immutable. Later on, I assign 5 to the variable b changing the value. As such the output statements will print out, 1, address of 1, and 5. 

I wanted to step up the difficulty so I decided to use another data type, not fundamental but still important to development, strings. Strings are ubiquitous to development and typically represent a sequential list of chars. Here is the code for the strings:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
using namespace std;

string * reverse(string*& reverse, const string*& original) {
    // Arrow operator points to value at address
    // Both ways are equivalent. Don't forget the parenthesis around the dereference operator.
    // int length = original->size();
    int length = (*original).size();
    
    cout << reverse << endl;
    for (int i = 1; i <= length; ++i) {
        // Both ways are equivalent. One uses the at method and the other uses bracket operator.
        // https://cplusplus.com/reference/string/basic_string/
        // (*reverse) += (*original)[length - i];
        (*reverse) += original->at(length - i);
        cout << (*reverse) << endl;
    }
    return reverse;

}

int main() {
    // since strings are part of std lib, u must either include the namespace or add the appropriate scope
    // std::string s;
    string s = "hello";
    string u = s + "!";
    const string * t = &u;
    // It is not recommended to return the address of a local variable outside the function as it goes out of scope after the function returns.
    // In this case, both rev and dummy need to be declared and initialized in the main function.
    string * rev;
    string dummy = "";
    rev = &dummy;
    string * r = reverse(rev, t);
    // You must initialize to a variable of the same type when you declare a pointer.
    cout << "r: " << r << endl;
    cout << "*r: " << *r << endl;
    // string * r = reverse(t);
    // cout << "t (*s): " << t << endl;
    // cout << "s: " << s <<endl; 
    // cout << "u: " << u <<endl; 
    // cout << "r: " << r <<endl; 
    // cout << "*r: " << *r <<endl; 
    return 0;
}
```

Lots of little bits here. The first is the use of std::. std is the namespace standard and :: is the namespace operator. I'm not too familiar with the namespace operator- should look into this later but it's main purpose is to avoid name collisions. Std lib contains a whole slew of useful classes and functions so it's a common one to use. To avoid writing std:: all the time, you need to phrase:

```cpp
using namespace namespace_identifier;
```

In this case, the namespace_identifier for the standard library is std. With this statement, declaring a string is simple:

```cpp
string string_identifier;
```

To initialize a string, simply use quotes for the strings.

```cpp
string_identifier = "hello, world";
```

I wanted to do some string operations so I chose reverse, a common way to test the string functionality. To do this, you need to be able to build a string. Fortunately, concatenation with strings is done with the + sign. I declared a string and a string pointer for the original string and a string and a string pointer for the soon to be reversed string. This is critical. **You cannot return the address of a local variable outside the function.** It goes out of scope after the function returns. If I were to declare the reversed string and pointer inside the local function, I would not be able to access it outside the local function. Believe me, I tried. The reverse operation was fairly standard. I returned a pointer to the reversed string, as mentioned above, already declared in the main function. **To access the length of a string or array, use .size().** Another neat feature of pointers is the way to access the value methods. 

```cpp
(*pointer). <--> pointer->
```

You can use the arrow operators to access the methods of the value type in the address. Don't forget the parenthesis around the dereference operator. In this case, I can use the size() method of strings in both ways. 

I forgot to mention. C++ is a compiled language and needs a compiler to run the program. Below is a simple command to compile a single source file to an executable. 

```cpp
g++ -std=c++0x filename.cpp -o filename
```
In the string file, I wanted to reverse a string. A simple way to do that is to have your unreversed but soon to be reversed string and the original string. For the length of the string, I would add the value at the index in reverse order and assign it to my string. I realized now that I could of just used the decrement operator instead of the increment operator since I am just concatenating the reverse string in each iteration. My code is littered with cout statments which is a bad practice since you should use the debugger when coding. **I will not use cout statements for debugging.** I need to use breakpoints in the code to see the local variables and status of my application. 

I wanted to also use classes in my code. C++ is an object oriented languages and classes are a powerful feature that I should use. As such I created a class called SuperString that inherits from the standard library class string and adds my own implementation of reverse. 

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
using namespace std;

class SuperString : public string{
    string text;
    public:
        SuperString(string str) {
            text = str;
        }
        void printString() const;
        SuperString * reverseString(SuperString*& new_string, const SuperString*& old_string);
};
// ^ Classes have semicolons at the end
void SuperString::printString() const{
    cout << this -> text << endl;
}

SuperString * SuperString::reverseString(SuperString*& new_string, const SuperString*& old_string) {
    int length = (*old_string).text.size();
    // cout << length << endl;
    for (int i = 1; i <= length; ++i) {
        (*new_string).text += (*old_string).text[length-i];
    }
    // cout << (*new_string).text << endl;
    return new_string;
}

int main() {
    SuperString a ("hello");
    const SuperString * a_pointer = &a;
    a.printString();
    // How do I change the type declarations for this pointer?
    // You cannot call a non-const method with a const object. 
    // You should consider all methods you write and declare const if that's what it is.
    (*a_pointer).printString();
    cout << a_pointer <<endl;
    SuperString * b;
    SuperString dummy ("");
    b = &dummy;
    b = (*b).reverseString(b,a_pointer);
    (*b).printString();
    return 0;
```

In this example, I use the same methodology- create two pointers and two strings. Pass the reference of the strings through to the reverse function. **One thing I learned here is that you cannot call a non-const method with a const object.** When I was programming this section of the code, I realized that the const method was preventing me from passing the argument into the reverse function. As such, I decided to remove the const modifier from b. This means that I cannot call reverse string on a because of the const keyword modifying it. Other than that, the class declaration is new.

```cpp

class SuperString : public string{
    string text;
    public:
        SuperString(string str) {
            text = str;
        }
        void printString() const;
        SuperString * reverseString(SuperString*& new_string, const SuperString*& old_string);
};
```

The class ends with a semicolon which I totally forgot about. The SuperString class extends the string class with the first line. I forgot what the public keyword does- it has something to do with the access to the member functions inside string. I'm assuming public means that I have access to the parent class method anywhere, protected means that I have access only within the class scope, and private means that I don't have access. I have a basic constructor which assigns text to a string and a printString method and a reverseString method. I have the const keyword to a function- not sure what that means either and I have no guesses about that. 

For now, I want to touch everything mentioned in the tutorial so I'm going to make a list of everything and try to use all of them.

- Fundamental Data Types
- Streams
- Pass by reference/ pass by value
- Function templates
- Namespaces
- Pointers
- Dynamic allocation
- Structs
- Type Aliases/Unions
- Enumerators
- Classes
- Constructuors
- this keyword
- Static members
- Class Templates
- Template Specialization
- Special Member Functions 
- rvalue reference
- Friends
- Inheritance
- Access Modifiers
- Multiple Inheritance
- Polymorphism
- Virtual Members
- Abstract base class
- Conversions with classes
- Exceptions
- Preprocessor Directives
- Source and Header Files

That's 29 things. Whew. What a lot of stuff to cover. Hopefully with all this information, I will be fluent in cpp- able to solve algorithmic problems and design complex structures in my code.